Azure data explorer (#21643)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/azure_data_explorer.markdown

---
title: Azure Data Explorer
description: Setup for Azure Data Explorer integration
ha_category:
  - History
ha_release: 20.3
ha_iot_class: Cloud Push
ha_codeowners:
  - '@kaareseras'

> ha_domain: azure_data_explorer

Reviewer: Check again if the list is complete because I think you are missing a few options 😉

Author: What am I missing here?

---
[Azure Data Explorer](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/data-explorer/)  is a high performace timeseries database, query engine and dashboarding tool.

> The Home Assistant `Azure Data Explorer` integration allows you to hook into the Home Assistant event bus and forward events to Azure Data Explorer for analytics and dashboarding.

Reviewer: My preference would be to write this more into an entire paragraph/sentence.

> ## Create a free Azure account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create a free Azure account

```
There should be a blank line after each header

.create table ['raw'] (entity_id: string, state: string, attributes: dynamic, last_changed: datetime, last_updated: datetime, context: dynamic)

.create table ['raw'] ingestion json mapping ['ha_json_mapping'] '[{"column":"entity_id","path":"$.entity_id"},{"column":"state","path":"$.state"},{"column":"attributes","path":"$.attributes"},{"column":"last_changed","path":"$.last_canged"},{"column":"last_updated","path":"$.last_updated"},{"column":"context","path":"$.context"}]'
```

## Configuration
>if using a free cluste, check the **Use Queueing client** in the form

{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

After completiing the flow, Home Assistant is sending data to Azure Data Explorer. 

> Home Assistant is buffering for defualt 5 seconds before sending, and Batching Policy in Azure Data Explorer will futher batch up for default 

## Filters

Optinaly add the following lines to your `configuration.yaml` file for filtering data ingested into Azure Data Explorer:

```yaml
# Example configuration.yaml entry
azure_data_explorer:
  filter:
    include_domains:
    - homeassistant
    - light
    - media_player

> ```

Reviewer: Why is this not handled in an options_flow in core but in YAML? And the first setup of the integration go through the config_flow? I think it's still a point of discussion in the core pull request.

Author: To my knowledge this is not posible to do in option_flow, or at least it was not posible at the time of the PR

Reviewer 2: @kaareseras @klaasnicolaas Is this a blocking change? Could you please guide on the next steps?

Author: No, this is not blocking. Still next step is for someone to pick this up for review and release

Reviewer 2: @frenck Request your review.

---
title: Azure Data Explorer
description: Setup for Azure Data Explorer integration
ha_category:
  - History

> ha_release: 20.3

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ha_release: 2024.6
ha_config_flow: true
```

> ha_release: 20.3

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ha_release: 2024.6
```

---
title: Azure Data Explorer
description: Setup for Azure Data Explorer integration
ha_category:
  - History
ha_release: 2024.6
ha_config_flow: true
ha_iot_class: Cloud Push
ha_codeowners:
  - '@kaareseras'
ha_domain: azure_data_explorer
---

> [Azure Data Explorer](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/data-explorer/)  is a high performace timeseries database, query engine and dashboarding tool. The Home Assistant `Azure Data Explorer` integration allows you to hook into the Home Assistant event bus and forward events to Azure Data Explorer for analytics and dashboarding. From here data can be viewed in buildin dashboards, PowerBi and Grafana amoung others.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Azure Data Explorer](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/data-explorer/) is a high-performance time-series database, query engine, and dashboarding tool. The Home Assistant Azure Data Explorer integration allows you to hook into the Home Assistant event bus and forward events to Azure Data Explorer for analytics and dashboarding. From here, data can be viewed in building dashboards, PowerBi, and Grafana, among others.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites

Before you can add Azure Data Explorer to Home Assistant, you need to set up an Azure account, create a Service Principal, and create a cluster and add a database.
```

> ## Create a free Azure account

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Creating a free Azure account
```

> ## Creating a free Azure account

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Creating a free Azure account
```

> * Create a  [free Azure account](https://azure.microsoft.com/). you will be asked for creditcard info, but all rescources created here are free.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Create a [free Azure account](https://azure.microsoft.com/). You will be asked for credit card information, but all resources created here are free.
```

> * Create a [free Azure account](https://azure.microsoft.com/). You will be asked for credit card information, but all resources created here are free.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Create a [free Azure account](https://azure.microsoft.com/). You will be asked for credit card information, but all resources created here are free.
```

> ## Create a Service Principal (App registration)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Creating a Service Principal (App registration)
```

> ## Creating a Service Principal (App registration)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Creating a Service Principal (App registration)
```

> For Home Assistant to authenticate with Azure Data Explorer, it need a **Service Principal**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For Home Assistant to authenticate with Azure Data Explorer, it needs a *Service Principal*.
```

> 1. Create a [Service Principal](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/provision-azure-ad-app) follow guide step 1-7

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. To create a Service Principal, follow the guide on [Creating Microsoft Entra application registration](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/provision-azure-ad-app) steps 1-7.
```
This link leads to the *Create Microsoft Entra application registration* procedure. Is this correct?
I added the name of the procedure to the step, to make it clear that this is the procedure to follow.

2. Copy values for later use:

>     * Application (client) ID  <--From App registration owerwiev
>     * Directory (tenant) ID    <--From App registration owerwiev

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Application (client) ID: From App registration overview
    - Directory (tenant) ID: From App registration overview
```

>     * Secret value             <--From when the secret was created in 1.7

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Secret value: From when the secret was created in step 1.7
```

> ## Create Free Azure Dataexplorer cluster and Database

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Creating a Free Azure Data Explorer cluster and database
```

> ## Creating a Free Azure Data Explorer cluster and database

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Creating a Free Azure Data Explorer cluster and database
```

> There are two ways of creating an Azure Data Explorer Cluster: **Pay as you go (PAYG)** or **Free**
> to create a paid cluster follow instructions from here: [Microsoft quickstart](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/create-cluster-database-portal)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are two ways of creating an Azure Data Explorer Cluster: **Pay as you go (PAYG)** or **Free**.
To create a paid cluster, follow the instructions from the [Microsoft quickstart guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/create-cluster-database-portal)
```

> However Microsoft has released a free offer and this guide describes how to set up a free Azure Data Explorer Cluster and database:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, Microsoft has released a free offer, and this guide describes how to set up a free Azure Data Explorer Cluster and database:
```

> There are a few different between the **PAYG** and **Free** versions:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are a few differences between the **PAYG** and **Free** versions:
```

> | Feature         | PAYG Cluster           | Free Cluster                    |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Feature         | PAYG cluster           | Free cluster                    |
```

| --------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------- |

> | Ingestion       | Streaming and Queueing | Queueing only (for now)         |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Ingestion       | Streaming and queueing | Queueing only (for now)         |
```

> | Cluster size    | Fully scalable         | 4 vCPU, 8GB Menory, ~100GB data |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Cluster size    | Fully scalable         | 4 vCPU, 8 GB Memory, ~100 GB data |
```

> 1. Navigate to [aka.ms/kustofree](https://aka.ms/kustofree).
> 2. Navigate to **My Cluster** .

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Go to [aka.ms/kustofree](https://aka.ms/kustofree).
2. Go to **My Cluster** .
```

> 3. And click the **Create Cluster** button.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Select **Create Cluster**.
```

> 4. Name the Cluster and database.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Name the cluster and database.
```

> 5. Copy the **database name** for later use

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
5. Copy the **database name** for later use.
```

> 5. Check terms and condition (after reading them) and click **Create Cluster**.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
5. Check the **Terms and Conditions** (after reading them) and select **Create Cluster**.
```

> 5. Check the **Terms and Conditions** (after reading them) and select **Create Cluster**.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
6. Check the **Terms and Conditions** (after reading them) and select **Create Cluster**.
```

> Within a minute, you will have a Azure Data Explorer cluster ready

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Within a minute, you will have an Azure Data Explorer cluster ready.
```

> After the creation of the database, copy the **Data ingestion URI** from the top of the page

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After the database has been created, copy the **Data ingestion URI** from the top of the page.
```

> ## Create Azure Data Table

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Creating an Azure data table
```

> ## Creating an Azure data table

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Creating an Azure data table
```

> 1. Navigate to [aka.ms/kustofree](https://aka.ms/kustofree).
> 2. Navigate to **Query**.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Go to [aka.ms/kustofree](https://aka.ms/kustofree).
2. Go to **Query**.
```

> 3. Write and execute the foloing statements one by one, replacing the content between the <> with the copied values (including the brackets)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Write and perform the following statements one by one, replacing the placeholder content between the <> with the copied values (including the brackets).
```

```KQL
// Give the Service Pricipal write access to the database
.add database ['<databasename>'] ingestors ('aadapp=<ApplicationID>;<DirectoryID>');

// Give the Service Pricipal read access to database (used for connectivity checks) 
.add database ['<databasename>'] viewers ('aadapp=<ApplicationID>;<DirectoryID>');

> // Create a table for the data to be ingested into (Replace name and copy inserted *name* for later use)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
// Create a table for the data to be ingested into (replace the name and copy inserted *name* for later use)
```

.create table ['<name_to_be_replaced>'] (entity_id: string, state: string, attributes: dynamic, last_changed: datetime, last_updated: datetime, context: dynamic)

> // Creat a mapping from the incomming JSON to the table and collums just created (replace name with table name from previous step)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
// Creat a mapping from the incoming JSON to the table and columns just created (replace the name with the table name from the previous step)
```

.create table ['<name_to_be_replaced>'] ingestion json mapping ['ha_json_mapping'] '[{"column":"entity_id","path":"$.entity_id"},{"column":"state","path":"$.state"},{"column":"attributes","path":"$.attributes"},{"column":"last_changed","path":"$.last_canged"},{"column":"last_updated","path":"$.last_updated"},{"column":"context","path":"$.context"}]'
```

> This is an example with a free cluster for reference

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is an example with a free cluster for reference:
```

```KQL
.add database ['HomeAssistant'] ingestors ('aadapp=b5253d02-c8f4-1234-a0f0-818491ba2a1f;72f123bf-86f1-41af-91ab-2d7cd011db93');

.add database ['HomeAssistant'] viewers ('aadapp=b5253d02-c8f4-1234-a0f0-818491ba2a1f;72f123bf-86f1-41af-91ab-2d7cd011db93');

.create table ['raw'] (entity_id: string, state: string, attributes: dynamic, last_changed: datetime, last_updated: datetime, context: dynamic)

.create table ['raw'] ingestion json mapping ['ha_json_mapping'] '[{"column":"entity_id","path":"$.entity_id"},{"column":"state","path":"$.state"},{"column":"attributes","path":"$.attributes"},{"column":"last_changed","path":"$.last_canged"},{"column":"last_updated","path":"$.last_updated"},{"column":"context","path":"$.context"}]'
```

## Configuration

> >if using a free cluste, check the **Use Queueing client** in the form

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If using a free cluster, check the **Use Queueing client** in the form.
```

> ## Configuration

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```
Removing this title, as there would be a duplicate with the config flow.

> If using a free cluster, check the **Use Queueing client** in the form.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

> After completiing the flow, Home Assistant is sending data to Azure Data Explorer. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After the flow has been completed, Home Assistant sends data to Azure Data Explorer. 
```

> {% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

If using a free cluster, check the **Use Queueing client** in the form.
```

> > Home Assistant is buffering for defualt 5 seconds before sending, and Batching Policy in Azure Data Explorer will futher batch up for default 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By default, Home Assistant buffers for 5 seconds before sending, and the Batching Policy in Azure Data Explorer will further batch up for default.
```
What do you mean by *batch up for default*?

## Filters

> Optinaly add the following lines to your `configuration.yaml` file for filtering data ingested into Azure Data Explorer:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Optionally, add the following lines to your {% term "configuration.yaml" %} file for filtering data ingested into Azure Data Explorer:
```

```

{% configuration %}
filter:
  description: Filter domains and entities for Data Explorer. ([Configure Filter](#configure-filter))
  required: true
  type: map
  default: Includes all entities from all domains
  keys:
    include_domains:
      description: List of domains to include (e.g., `light`).
      required: false
      type: list
    exclude_domains:
      description: List of domains to exclude (e.g., `light`).
      required: false
      type: list
    include_entity_globs:
      description: Include all entities matching a listed pattern (e.g., `sensor.weather_*`).
      required: false
      type: list
    exclude_entity_globs:
      description: Exclude all entities matching a listed pattern (e.g., `sensor.weather_*`).
      required: false
      type: list
    include_entities:
      description: List of entities to include (e.g., `light.attic`).
      required: false
      type: list
    exclude_entities:
      description: List of entities to include (e.g., `light.attic`).
      required: false
      type: list
{% endconfiguration %}

<div class='note warning'>
Not filtering domains or entities will send every event to Azure Data Explorer.
</div>

> ### Configure Filter

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Configuring a filter
```

By default, no entity will be excluded. To limit which entities are being exposed to `Azure Data Explorer`, you can use the `filter` parameter.

```yaml
# Example filter to include specified domains and exclude specified entities
azure_data_explorer:
  filter:
    include_domains:
      - alarm_control_panel
      - light
    include_entity_globs:
      - binary_sensor.*_occupancy
    exclude_entities:
      - light.kitchen_light
```

Filters are applied as follows:

> 1. No includes or excludes - pass all entities
> 2. Includes, no excludes - only include specified entities
> 3. Excludes, no includes - only exclude specified entities

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. No includes or excludes - pass all entities.
2. Includes, no excludes - only include specified entities.
3. Excludes, no includes - only exclude specified entities.
```

4. Both includes and excludes:

>    - Include domain and/or glob patterns specified

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - Include domain and/or glob patterns specified:
```

>       - If domain is included, and entity not excluded or match exclude glob pattern, pass
>       - If entity matches include glob pattern, and entity does not match any exclude criteria (domain, glob pattern or listed), pass
>       - If domain is not included, glob pattern does not match, and entity not included, fail

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      - If the domain is included, and the entity is not excluded or matches the exclude glob pattern, pass.
      - If the entity matches include glob pattern, and the entity does not match any exclude criteria (domain, glob pattern, or listed), pass.
      - If the domain is not included, the glob pattern does not match, and the entity not included, fail.
```

>    - Exclude domain and/or glob patterns specified and include does not list domains or glob patterns
>       - If domain is excluded and entity not included, fail
>       - If entity matches exclude glob pattern and entity not included, fail
>       - If entity does not match any exclude criteria (domain, glob pattern or listed), pass

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - Exclude domain and/or glob patterns specified and include does not list domains or glob patterns
      - If the domain is excluded and the entity is not included, fail.
      - If the entity matches an exclude glob pattern and the entity is not included, fail.
      - If the entity does not match any exclude criteria (domain, glob pattern, or listed), pass.
```

   - Neither include or exclude specifies domains or glob patterns

>       - If entity is included, pass (as #2 above)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      - If the entity is included, pass (as #2 above).
```

>       - If entity include and exclude, the entity exclude is ignored

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      - If the entity matches both an include and an exclude pattern, the entity exclude is ignored.
```

>       - If entity include and exclude, the entity exclude is ignored

Reviewer 4: Not sure I understand. Is this *If the entity matches both an include and an exclude pattern*?

Reviewer 5: Correct 👍

## Using Azure Data Explorer

> As the setup is complete, data is being sent to Azure Data Explorer, and you can start exploring your data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once the setup is complete, data is being sent to Azure Data Explorer, and you can start exploring your data.
```

> Here are som rescources to learn to use Azure Data Explorer

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Here are some resources to help you learn how to use Azure Data Explorer:
```

> * MS Learn: [https://aka.ms/learn.kql](https://aka.ms/learn.kql), [https://aka.ms/learn.adx](https://aka.ms/learn.adx)
> * You tube: [Official Microsoft Azure Data Explorer YouTube channal](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCPgPN-0DLaImaaDR_TtKR8A)
> * Blog: [Official Microsoft Data Explorer blog](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/azure-data-explorer-blog/bg-p/AzureDataExplorer)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- MS Learn: [https://aka.ms/learn.kql](https://aka.ms/learn.kql), [https://aka.ms/learn.adx](https://aka.ms/learn.adx)
- YouTube: [Official Microsoft Azure Data Explorer YouTube channal](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCPgPN-0DLaImaaDR_TtKR8A)
- Blog: [Official Microsoft Data Explorer blog](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/azure-data-explorer-blog/bg-p/AzureDataExplorer)
```

---
title: Azure Data Explorer
description: Setup for Azure Data Explorer integration
ha_category:
  - History
ha_release: 2024.6
ha_config_flow: true
ha_iot_class: Cloud Push
ha_codeowners:
  - '@kaareseras'
ha_domain: azure_data_explorer
---
[Azure Data Explorer](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/data-explorer/) is a high-performance time-series database, query engine, and dashboarding tool. The Home Assistant Azure Data Explorer integration allows you to hook into the Home Assistant event bus and forward events to Azure Data Explorer for analytics and dashboarding. From here, data can be viewed in building dashboards, PowerBi, and Grafana, among others.
## Prerequisites

> Before you can add Azure Data Explorer to Home Assistant, you need to set up an Azure account, create a Service Principal, and create a cluster and add a database.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before you can add Azure Data Explorer to Home Assistant, you need to set up an Azure account, create a Service Principal,  create a cluster, and add a database.
```

Create a [free Azure account](https://azure.microsoft.com/). You will be asked for credit card information, but all resources created here are free.

### Creating a Service Principal (App registration)

For Home Assistant to authenticate with Azure Data Explorer, it needs a *Service Principal*.
1. To create a Service Principal, follow the guide on [Creating Microsoft Entra application registration](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/provision-azure-ad-app) steps 1-7.
2. Copy values for later use:
    - Application (client) ID: From App registration overview
    - Directory (tenant) ID: From App registration overview
    - Secret value: From when the secret was created in step 1.7

### Creating a Free Azure Data Explorer cluster and database

There are two ways of creating an Azure Data Explorer Cluster: **Pay as you go (PAYG)** or **Free**.
To create a paid cluster, follow the instructions from the [Microsoft quickstart guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/create-cluster-database-portal)
However, Microsoft has released a free offer, and this guide describes how to set up a free Azure Data Explorer Cluster and database:

> There are a few differences between the **PAYG** and **Free** versions:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are a few differences between the **PAYG** and **Free** versions:

```

---
title: Azure Data Explorer
description: Setup for Azure Data Explorer integration
ha_category:
  - History
ha_release: 2024.6
ha_config_flow: true
ha_iot_class: Cloud Push
ha_codeowners:
  - '@kaareseras'
ha_domain: azure_data_explorer
---
[Azure Data Explorer](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/data-explorer/) is a high-performance time-series database, query engine, and dashboarding tool. The Home Assistant Azure Data Explorer integration allows you to hook into the Home Assistant event bus and forward events to Azure Data Explorer for analytics and dashboarding. From here, data can be viewed in building dashboards, PowerBi, and Grafana, among others.
## Prerequisites

> Before you can add Azure Data Explorer to Home Assistant, you need to set up an Azure account, create a Service Principal,  create a cluster, and add a database.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before you can add Azure Data Explorer to Home Assistant, you need to set up an Azure account, create a Service Principal,  create a cluster, and add a database.

```

---
title: Azure Data Explorer
description: Setup for Azure Data Explorer integration
ha_category:
  - History
ha_release: 2024.6
ha_config_flow: true
ha_iot_class: Cloud Push
ha_codeowners:
  - '@kaareseras'
ha_domain: azure_data_explorer
---
[Azure Data Explorer](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/data-explorer/) is a high-performance time-series database, query engine, and dashboarding tool. The Home Assistant Azure Data Explorer integration allows you to hook into the Home Assistant event bus and forward events to Azure Data Explorer for analytics and dashboarding. From here, data can be viewed in building dashboards, PowerBi, and Grafana, among others.

> ## Prerequisites

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

## Prerequisites
```

> Before you can add Azure Data Explorer to Home Assistant, you need to set up an Azure account, create a Service Principal,  create a cluster, and add a database.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before you can add Azure Data Explorer to Home Assistant, you need to set up an Azure account, create a Service Principal, create a cluster, and add a database.
```

---
title: Azure Data Explorer
description: Setup for Azure Data Explorer integration
ha_category:
  - History
ha_release: 2024.6
ha_config_flow: true
ha_iot_class: Cloud Push
ha_codeowners:
  - '@kaareseras'

> ha_domain: azure_data_explorer

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ha_domain: azure_data_explorer
related:
  - docs: /docs/configuration/
```

---

> [Azure Data Explorer](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/data-explorer/) is a high-performance time-series database, query engine, and dashboarding tool. The Home Assistant Azure Data Explorer integration allows you to hook into the Home Assistant event bus and forward events to Azure Data Explorer for analytics and dashboarding. From here, data can be viewed in building dashboards, PowerBi, and Grafana, among others.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Azure Data Explorer](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/data-explorer/) is a high-performance time-series database, query engine, and dashboarding tool. The Home Assistant **Azure Data Explorer** {% term integration %} allows you to hook into the Home Assistant event bus and forward events to Azure Data Explorer for analytics and dashboarding. From here, data can be viewed in building dashboards, PowerBi, and Grafana, among others.
```

## Prerequisites

Before you can add Azure Data Explorer to Home Assistant, you need to set up an Azure account, create a Service Principal, create a cluster, and add a database.

### Creating a free Azure account

Create a [free Azure account](https://azure.microsoft.com/). You will be asked for credit card information, but all resources created here are free.

### Creating a Service Principal (App registration)

For Home Assistant to authenticate with Azure Data Explorer, it needs a *Service Principal*.

> 1. To create a Service Principal, follow the guide on [Creating Microsoft Entra application registration](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/provision-azure-ad-app) steps 1-7.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. To create a Service Principal, follow the guide on [Creating Microsoft Entra application registration](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/provision-azure-ad-app), steps 1-7.
```

> 2. Copy values for later use:
>     - Application (client) ID: From App registration overview
>     - Directory (tenant) ID: From App registration overview
>     - Secret value: From when the secret was created in step 1.7

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Copy values for later use:
   - Application (client) ID: From App registration overview
   - Directory (tenant) ID: From App registration overview
   - Secret value: From when the secret was created in step 1.7
```

### Creating a Free Azure Data Explorer cluster and database

There are two ways of creating an Azure Data Explorer Cluster: **Pay as you go (PAYG)** or **Free**.

> To create a paid cluster, follow the instructions from the [Microsoft quickstart guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/create-cluster-database-portal)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To create a paid cluster, follow the instructions from the [Microsoft Quickstart Guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/create-cluster-database-portal). 
```

However, Microsoft has released a free offer, and this guide describes how to set up a free Azure Data Explorer Cluster and database:

There are a few differences between the **PAYG** and **Free** versions:

| Feature         | PAYG cluster           | Free cluster                    |
| --------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| Ingestion       | Streaming and queueing | Queueing only (for now)         |
| Cluster size    | Fully scalable         | 4 vCPU, 8 GB Memory, ~100 GB data |

1. Go to [aka.ms/kustofree](https://aka.ms/kustofree).

> 2. Go to **My Cluster** .

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Go to **My Cluster**.
```

1. Go to [aka.ms/kustofree](https://aka.ms/kustofree).
2. Go to **My Cluster**.
3. Select **Create Cluster**.
4. Name the cluster and database.
5. Copy the **database name** for later use.

> 6. Check the **Terms and Conditions** (after reading them) and select **Create Cluster**.
>   - Within a minute, you will have an Azure Data Explorer cluster ready.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
6. Check the **Terms and Conditions** (after reading them) and select **Create Cluster**.
   - Within a minute, you will have an Azure Data Explorer cluster ready.
```

.create table ['<name_to_be_replaced>'] ingestion json mapping ['ha_json_mapping'] '[{"column":"entity_id","path":"$.entity_id"},{"column":"state","path":"$.state"},{"column":"attributes","path":"$.attributes"},{"column":"last_changed","path":"$.last_canged"},{"column":"last_updated","path":"$.last_updated"},{"column":"context","path":"$.context"}]'
```

This is an example with a free cluster for reference:

```KQL
.add database ['HomeAssistant'] ingestors ('aadapp=b5253d02-c8f4-1234-a0f0-818491ba2a1f;72f123bf-86f1-41af-91ab-2d7cd011db93');

.add database ['HomeAssistant'] viewers ('aadapp=b5253d02-c8f4-1234-a0f0-818491ba2a1f;72f123bf-86f1-41af-91ab-2d7cd011db93');

.create table ['raw'] (entity_id: string, state: string, attributes: dynamic, last_changed: datetime, last_updated: datetime, context: dynamic)

.create table ['raw'] ingestion json mapping ['ha_json_mapping'] '[{"column":"entity_id","path":"$.entity_id"},{"column":"state","path":"$.state"},{"column":"attributes","path":"$.attributes"},{"column":"last_changed","path":"$.last_canged"},{"column":"last_updated","path":"$.last_updated"},{"column":"context","path":"$.context"}]'
```

> 
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

   - Directory (tenant) ID: From App registration overview
   - Secret value: From when the secret was created in step 1.7

### Creating a Free Azure Data Explorer cluster and database

There are two ways of creating an Azure Data Explorer Cluster: **Pay as you go (PAYG)** or **Free**.
To create a paid cluster, follow the instructions from the [Microsoft Quickstart Guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/create-cluster-database-portal). 
However, Microsoft has released a free offer, and this guide describes how to set up a free Azure Data Explorer Cluster and database:

There are a few differences between the **PAYG** and **Free** versions:

| Feature         | PAYG cluster           | Free cluster                    |
| --------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| Ingestion       | Streaming and queueing | Queueing only (for now)         |
| Cluster size    | Fully scalable         | 4 vCPU, 8 GB Memory, ~100 GB data |

1. Go to [aka.ms/kustofree](https://aka.ms/kustofree).
2. Go to **My Cluster**.
3. Select **Create Cluster**.
4. Name the cluster and database.
5. Copy the **database name** for later use.

> 6. Check the **Terms and Conditions** (after reading them) and select **Create Cluster**.
> 
> Within a minute, you will have an Azure Data Explorer cluster ready.
> 
> After the database has been created, copy the **Data ingestion URI** from the top of the page.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
6. Check the **Terms and Conditions** (after reading them) and select **Create Cluster**.
  - Within a minute, you will have an Azure Data Explorer cluster ready.
7. After the database has been created, copy the **Data ingestion URI** from the top of the page.
```
